All right, now that we derive this new weird concept for time known as time elation, what I want to
do is take a step back and slow it down.
Run through an example problem and allow you to practice some problems on your own for set.
You can run through different questions that arise when dealing with time dilation and build up intuition.
Why?
Because we learn physics by doing physics.
OK, so let's jump into our first time dilation problem.
For example, if you will, this problem, the statement says a rocket ship leaves the Earth at a constant
speed.
And again, this is the key term we want.
Do you know that we can use ideas from constant or special relativity?
We need a constant speed for our initial reference frames to arise.
But we're going to have a class.
The speed of 0.8 has a speed of light, see?
And the problem states when I clock on the rocket says one hour has elapsed.
The rocket ship sends a light signal back to Earth.
Now there are going to be multiple parts to this problem, but in part a what we're going to try and
tackle is according to Earth clocks.
When was the signal set?
Now, as I said in the first section when we ran through our example problem, I stated that the path
towards success on any special relativity problem, that path is paved by paying attention and labeling
our different reference frames, figuring out which one is the proper time.
As we just ran through and also are counting, keeping track of everything and sorting it out in your
mind, if you can do those things, if you have these elements within your problem-solving, you will
always pave a path towards success.
OK, so let's do that now.
The most important thing is in special relativity, especially with time dilation so far is figuring
out what the proper time is.
And as I said in the past few videos, proper time is determined by figuring out when the two events
that transpire that we're trying to figure out the time between when they happen in a reference frame.
At the same point such that that reference frame appears as if it's at rest, OK?
So what I want you to do on these problems is.
Label out again, accounting.
Label also different events and then use that to figure out what I just said.
Right.
We can make it easy.
We can make it easy if we do that.
So for people on a we know there are two events.
Look, we're trying to find when the signal was set.
So there are two events between that elapse of time.
We have event one when our rocket ship flies out, launches out of the Earth, and then we have event
two when the signal is set back to here.
So you get one leading the Earth event to sending a signal.
So for proper time, in order to designate that the question is in what reference frame do these events
occur in the same place?
What a shame is that?
Well, in the rocket, we know that when we leave the Earth, according to somebody in a rocket.
It happens when they're standing in the rocket.
And then when you send a signal, they're standing at the same point in the rocket and they're a reference
frame.
And that's when it's sent back.
So, in other words, if somebody isn't a rocket, they're standing on the rocket the entire trip.
And it looks like the Earth is going back.
It's moving behind them.
And when they get to sending a signal out, they were just standing right there.
They push a button on their console.
The signal gets sent out and it goes back to Earth.
So from that reference frame for this problem, our proper time.
Tenants must occur in the rocket ship, right?
These two events occur in a same spot in that reference frame.
But according to Earth, that one occurs right here when the rocket leaves and then signal sent at a
different position.
Up here in outer space.
OK, so this is the big challenging part in tackling any problem like this.
Figuring out what the proper time is.
But once we have that, we can just utilize the time dilation equations we derived previously.
So what was that?
What we stated was that time dilates or a moving clock appears to move slow.
So we stated that on Earth, where we don't have the proper time built at sea.
All right.
This time must be dilated by the Lorentz factor gamma delta t not.
And I'm going to put a rocket here just for extra emphasis.
You can use any kind of labelling system you want.
That's what I chose to use.
But actually, I'm going to back up a little bit to get some information on the board for you what I
would want you to do.
And this is what has worked for me, especially in engineering, when you need to keep track of different
numbers.
I like to put in a given field on my piece of paper, usually at the top right.
I put a given.
I specify what I'm looking for.
So I have that right in front of me.
It's right there on the paper.
If I get distracted, I can always go up to the top, refresh my line and then jump back into the prompts.
What we are given is that we have a constant speed of relative speed.
You sort of wrote here, but I'm going to I'm going to read it here also to keep track of it 0.8 times
speed of light.
And what I'm going to say is that Delta T rocket, just because we determine it is proper and there
we go, we got that list right there.
So all we really need to do is we figure we did the hard part.
We did the physics.
Now we just need a plug and chug, right?
So what do we know that the Lawrence factor is we know that Delta to Earth is going to be one or the
square root of one minus B to square it, or B or C.
So this was the relative velocity over see this whole quantity squared.
Finds Delta is not all the rocket.
And we know that is.
That's right here, actually forgot to write that there.
So this guy is proper and that's going to be one of ours.
We got all the ideas here.
We got our governing equation here.
All we need to do is throw the numbers in and just throw into our favorite mathematical mathematical
program or calculator.
So we end up with one minus the square root of one minus B relative.
Well, that's 0.8 C, and we're going to divide by C here.
We square this guy.
And that's multiplied by one hour because the hour is getting diluted, so we can expect the delta to
Earth to be larger, if it isn't, you messed something up.
So remember bill that intuition.
Use it as a guide to get to the correct solution.
And when we do this calculation, throw it into my personal favorite MATLAB.
We end up with Delta T as measured by Earth.
It following it is one point six, seven hours.
So as I was saying, our intuition dictates based on what we study so far that the Earth time between
these two events must be longer.
Space time must bend a bit to account for the second postulate special relativity.
So this makes sense.
We have zero six seven hours longer than that, which is measured by the Rock.
In other words, this is saying.
A moving plot.
Is observed.
To move.
You know, all right.
So that's ideal for intuition.
We're going to go next when we want to do is we want to tackle Part B of this problem.
Let's do just that.
All right, now, in Part B, what the question asked is if first, according to Earth clocks, how
long after the rocket left the the signal arrive back on Earth and the way in which we're going to tackle
this part is by jumping back to our special postulates a special relativity.
What did the second postulates say?
What does that say is stated that regardless of your reference frame, the speed of light is always
going to be constant.
It's not going to change.
And we verified this multiple times through a ton of experiments.
The speed of light is the speed of light.
That's just what it is.
So if we can use this, what we can do is we can use basic kinematics relationships to say that the
speed of light when it's transmitted from the rocket, it's going to speed right back to Earth at the
speed of C and using, you know, V equals Delta X over Delta T, we can figure out what the time is,
according to the Earth.
But in order to do that, we need the distance it has to travel, so we need to figure out, according
to the Earth.
This is an important fact, right?
We are in the Earth reference frame, according to the Earth.
How much distance does that light have to travel?
So that's what we're going to consider first.
And the way in which we do that is, again, we use basic kinematics.
Well, if the speed is constant, we know that the relative speed of the spaceship when it's flying
out, that has to be the total distance Delta X, according to the Earth Delta X out according to the
Earth.
That's going to be dealt the three out.
According to what we already really have right here, this should be deputy out.
We're expanding upon that variable name to make sure we stay on top of what's going on in the problem
again.
Labels aren't on keeping track of everything.
Use whatever works for you.
We need good accounting.
But using this, we know the relative speed of the rocket.
It's point eight.
See, we know.
Delta T out, which is just that right there.
So all we really need to do is calculate the distance according to the Earth, that this has flown when
it sends a signal, because that's the distance, the light will have to travel back.
So we just multiply by Delta T and we find that Delta X out as measured by the Earth.
It is equal to the relative times Delta T out as measured by the Earth.
OK, so if we take all this literally plug and chug, we know a relative is just zero point eight C.
And ultimately, out of the Earth is just one point sixty seven.
Hours.
And we get sort of a convenient measurement for distance in special relativity, which you may or may
not have seen previously.
So what we get is we get this value.
We plug this into our calculator and keep this see out.
We get a 1.3 for.
I'm going to call light hours.
And I'll explain a second or in other words, this is sort of like three times ours.
All right.
So.
You probably heard the term light here, and that is basically the distance light travels in one year,
but a light hour is the distance like travels in one hour.
And why this is convenient, I'll show you in a second.
But what we're really doing is we're just saying we're checking the speed of light photons times by
tea that has to equal Delta X. We call it a light hour.
OK, now the reason why this is useful, I'm going to show you in the next step in solving this problem.
So what we have is we have this guy here.
We figured out the distance it has traveled out as measured by Earth.
And what we need to do is we need to figure out how long it takes for like to travel this distance all
the way back to the Earth.
OK, because we're already in the reference frame so we can take this kinematic or relationship and
literally just manipulate it to get the unknown quantity that we want.
So we know that the speed of light.
All right.
It's going to be the total distance of travels, which would be Delta X out Earth.
And we want to figure out the time over which that occurs, so that's really going to be Delta T back
as measured by the Earth.
OK, so we want to figure out this delta city back using this ultimate speed, which is a bit faster
than our relative speed.
So if we want to get this guy, you want to isolate this guy.
All we have to do is something very similar and then plug in Chuck.
So we just divide by C, multiply by Delta C, and we figure out that Delta T back.
As measured by Earth.
Is equal to.
Not ex out and sorry, I'm sort of slanting my writing here.
Not x out as measured by the Earth, divided by sea.
And you can see the magic here and using these units, because if we literally plug in Chuck, we got
that value right there.
We get a 1.3 for.
Like our or that three times ours.
We divide by sea, and when we end up with is this guy cancels out of the sea and we end up with ours.
So it's convenient.
We're taking basically this equation translating into units and then we divide by sea.
It knocks out that guy the sea term, and it's very quick, easy, efficient calculation, OK?
So we're going to see that units in special relativity, we come up with multiple units that are a bit
different than what you've seen previously.
And it's going to drive the analysis, drive your problem solving to make your life easier.
That's a good thing, right?
You should be very, very happy about that, right?
Because it could get much more complicated as we'll see later in the course.
So when we get.
Miscalculation into our calculator, we figure out it's one point three, four hours.
That's Delta T back as measured by the Earth.
And what we really want this problem is how long out the rock is up to the signal arrive back on Earth.
OK, so we want the total time after it shoots off here it comes over here.
We know that after that happens, it's one point six seven hours that it shoots some light that comes
back.
That's going to be one point three four hours.
So all we need to know is the total time.
And it's turtle time is going to be Delta T out.
Not out as measured by the Earth.
Plus, Delta C back.
As measured by the Earth, so I'm just going to put it there.
They're running out of board space here, so we know from Part A. that the time it takes to get out
before it sends a signal is one point sixty seven.
Hours and then we want to add the time it takes to get back, which is one point three four hours.
So when we do that calculation, you could just do it on top of your head.
You're good at your arithmetic.
We get up, get a value of three hours.
Since it leaves, that's when we would hear back.
And that is the answer to Part B.